from New York Times I'm Michael Bavaro
this is the
[Music]
daily
today as the Democratic party sifts
through the rubble of its sweeping
electoral loss and tries to chart a path
back to Power few people have as cleare
eyed a diagnosis as Senator Bernie
Sanders of Vermont which is why I gave
him a
[Music]
call it's Friday November
15th hello Senator Sanders yes Michael
Barbaro hey Michael how are you very
well I reached Senator Sanders in his
office on Capitol Hill on Thursday
morning you may not remember this but
the last time you and I spoke was back
in 2020 we were in the same room and we
were working on a profile of you focused
on your earliest days in public office
as mayor of Burlington oh it's not as
Vivid a memory for you
apparently as it is for me was it a good
story I thought it was a good story we
had our moments you and I in that
interview and
we don't need to reconstruct the whole
thing but there was a there was a
pointed moment where you were frustrated
with something I asked you almost got up
and left but then you decided to stay
all right let's do better this
time moving on um I just want to begin
Senator by asking for your reaction to
the news of the past 24 hours that
Republicans have taken control of the
house because what that means is that
Republicans now control both Chambers
and the White House you are about to be
in the
minority As president-elect Trump brings
a very aggressive agenda to Congress an
agenda frankly that Democrats have
called among other things a threat to
democracy so how are you processing that
well obviously our job is to Rally the
American people to make it clear
especially to working people that we
need an economy and a government that
works for all to expose as best we can
what Trump and his
administration are doing but it's not
just an inside the Beltway game it's a
question of rallying the American people
uh to fight back effectively so you're
in a fighting mood oh absolutely I think
right now uh is this is a pivotal moment
in American
history and the next year or two will
determine what happens in this country
for decades in my view fighting mood or
not are there any areas where you are
are prepared to work with the
president-elect absolutely and and what
might those be if Trump for example
follows through on his proposal to limit
interest rates on credit cards to 10%
which is what he campaigned on uh
absolutely I will be there I think
that's a very good idea I think it's
time we told the people on Wall Street
they cannot charge uh desperate
workingclass people who can't have a
hard time paying their bills 25 30 40%
interest rates that's urious
uh that's immoral and if Trump wants to
impose a credit card limit on interest
rates I'll be there so where your vision
of championing the working class
overlaps with his you may back his
agenda if he comes up with reasonable
ideas yes I would be uh interested in
working with him let's turn to what I
think is going to be the heart of this
conversation Senator Sanders which is
the effort underway across the
Democratic Party and you're a big part
of it of Reckoning with the meaning of
the outcome of this election and
understanding not just why kamla Harris
didn't win but why Donald Trump in
Victory expanded his electoral reach
into communities of color into America's
youth into blue State America including
your own home state of Vermont where
when you look at the New York Times
graphic you see those red arrows
suggesting his support deepened since he
last ran Donald Trump has created the
most racially and politically diverse
Coalition of any Republican in a
generation and you have participated as
I said in the postmortem underway across
the Democratic party and I just want to
read something you have said that a lot
of people when they read it found very
bracing this is what you said quote it
should come as no great surprise that a
Democratic party which has abandoned
Working Class People would find that
working class people have abandoned them
and you went on to say first this
abandonment was among white workingclass
Americans now it is Latino and black
workers as well while the Democratic
Leadership defends the status quo the
American people are angry and they want
change and they're right I want you to
just explain what you mean and be very
specific if you
can when you say that the Democratic
party has abandoned the working class
when and how did the Democratic party
abandon the working class well it's
something that's been going on for
decades including
disastrous trade policies pushed by uh
Bill Clinton you're talking about NAFTA
yeah that's right the reality is the
American people well many of them are
angry and they have every reason to be
angry today in America and sometimes you
know some of the elite does not
understand this today in America America
60% of our people are living paycheck to
paycheck I grew up in a family that live
paycheck to paycheck I understand the
stress involved in that it means that if
your car breaks down you don't know how
you get to work if you get sick you
don't know whether or not you can afford
to go to a doctor if your landlord
raises rent by 20% you don't know where
you're going to live where your kid is
going to go to school that's the reality
facing 60% of the American people me
meanwhile the very wealthiest people in
this country have never ever had it so
good that's a reality so what happened
in this campaign is Donald Trump said to
the American people you're angry you're
really pissed off and I know that and
you're right and then he gave his
explanation and his explanation which
was obviously nonsense and false and
racist Etc was that millions and
millions of undocumented people were
coming across the border they were
invading America or occupied country
they were taking your jobs taking your
benefits eating your cats and your dogs
that is why you are hurting now that is
a crazy explanation but it is an
explanation now you tell me what the
Democratic explanation was well please
please please explore that map this
critique onto the Democratic campaign
and its shortcomings well the Democratic
explanation was hey we have passed some
good things very important things in the
Biden Administration which happens to be
true Biden kept his word he was the most
Progressive president on domestic issues
since FDL we did a lot of good things
but instead of saying yeah we are
rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure
we're lowering the cost of prescription
drugs we are Transforming Our Energy
System we forgave student debt for 5
million people making some progress but
we have a long long way to go wait can I
just pause you because I I think I'm I'm
not certain I'm understanding something
where did the campaign of comma Harris
go wrong if it was working with what
you're describing as the building blocks
of a
successful policy agenda and I know that
you have said many
many it's not just KLA Harris it's the
democ in other words let me read you
something if I might please what I think
is one of the most interesting speeches
ever given Franklin delanor Roosevelt
inaugural a speech in 1936 middle of the
depression
so he starts his speech he says look
these are the things we did these are
the obstacles that we had to overcome
and then he says after being president
for four years he says that I quote I
see millions of families trying to live
on income so meager that the poll of
family disaster hangs over them day by
day I see millions of night education
Recreation and the opportunity to better
their lot and the lot of their children
I see one-third of a Nation ill housed
ill-clad ill-nourished end quote in
other words what Roosevelt did he said
look we're making progress but I look
out all over this country and I see tens
of millions of people who are hurting
instead of doing that the Democrats said
well we passed the inflation adjustment
act and economy is pretty good and
Donald Trump's a bad guy and we all
defend the women's constitutional right
to an abortion there was no appreciation
no appreciation of the struggling and
the suffering of millions and millions
of workingclass people and unless you
recognize that reality
and have a vision of how you get out of
that I think you're not going to be
going very far as a political party
you're saying that the party in this
last election didn't communicate that
they understood Americans pain as a
result they came off as defending the
status quo and I mean I don't think it's
a stretch to suggest that KLA Harris was
asked repeatedly what she would do
differently in this campaign and pretty
much said she didn't think anything
needed to be done differently and she
didn't campaign on disruption or large
scale change you seem to be suggesting
that's at the heart of Trump's Victory
the point that I am making is that
Ordinary People are not stupid they see
what's going on in their own eyes and if
you're not even talking about the
reality of what is going on the reality
of their lives they're going say hey no
change is going to come why would I want
to vote for a group of people who don't
even acknowledge the reality for example
you tell me you follow these things I do
we have today more income and wealth
inequality than we've ever had in the
history of this country did you hear a
lot of discussion on that no we are the
only major country on Earth not to
guarantee Healthcare to all people is a
human right and the only major country
not to provide Paid Family and Medical
Leave um do you hear how much discussion
of that not in this campaign not in this
campaign you got 20 million people in
America today who are trying to get by
on less than $15 an hour did you hear
any serious discussion of the need to
raise the minimum wage to a living wage
I don't think we did oh missed that one
too why do you think Senator Sanders
that Democrats didn't communicate an
understanding of his pain I mean one of
the ongoing critiques of the democratic
party that emerged since this election
is that it is a party of Elites captive
to college educated Coastal America and
that it's not understanding and
communicating this pain cuz it's not
living that pain well that's only half
of it it is it's not beholden to college
educated people that's the wrong word
okay it is beholden to the donors who
put hundreds and hundreds of millions of
dollars into it and to the bloody
Consultants out there who will end up
this campaign making zillions of dollars
doing their 302 tv ads rather than
figuring out how we talk reality to
Ordinary People and get them involved in
the political process Senator I want to
talk about what Democrats did talk about
in this last campaign cuz I I think it
may get to to a second element of your
critique aside from big money and aside
from the question of whether Democrats
failed to communicate an understanding
of working-class American pain and in
your second critique of Democrats In
This Moment was around identity and I
want to read what you said about
identity politics and and just to Define
this phrase identity politics I think
what you mean is a focus on racial
identity sexual identity among others
this is what you said you said it's not
just K Harris it's a Democratic party
which increasingly has become a party of
identity politics rather than
understanding that the vast majority of
people in this country are working class
this trend of workers leaving the
Democratic party and you return to this
theme started with whites and it has
accelerated to Latinos and blacks when I
hear you say that I hear you saying and
I want to make sure I'm I'm interpreting
it correctly that the Democratic party
including over the past year or so in
this campaign has turned off many
working-class Americans who feel that
the way the Democratic party especially
its leaders talk about things like race
and gender and trans people leaves them
feeling alienated from that conversation
being policed and even scolded by it for
not using the right words for not
accepting something like trans youth on
sports
teams is that what you mean but I think
the more important point is being
ignored their needs are being ignored
look and let me be very clear where the
Democratic party deserves a lot of
credit over the last many decades is in
fact leading the effort for women's
rights and we have come a long way until
roie Wade as a matter of fact and the
Democratic party deserves a lot of
credit for fighting for civil rights for
fighting for gay rights to fighting to
end bigotry all forms of bigotry in this
country Democrats were right on that
struggle but you go forward in both
directions you can say we are going to
fight for a bigotry free America that's
an ongoing struggle we made progress got
a long way to go but at the same time we
can stand up for the working class of
this country which by the way happens to
be significantly
African-American and Latino and women
who are the bulk of the working class in
this country so it's not either or it's
going forward in both directions that is
a winner some of the Democrats pundits
say well you know the problem is all of
these Trump people are racists and
they're sexist and they're homophobes
well no doubt that some of them are and
that's true most of them are not and I
suspect many of them actually voted for
the first black president in American
history Barack Obama all right but they
are in large numbers Working Class
People and we've got to speak to them in
an economic perspective that is clear
and straightforward I I guess I'm a a
touch confused by the answer you just
gave because your quote about identity
politics seemed to suggest that the
Democratic party's focus on identity is
in some opposition to its ability to
appeal to workingclass voters who may
feel turned off about that but then in
your answer I I I felt a little bit of a
retreat from that understanding I just
want to it's not a retreat it's not a
retreat you can say look isn't it great
that we have in fact a very and
effective black woman who's on the
Supreme Court great but you don't hang
your hat on that and say hey wellow what
you also want to do is talk about the
reality of what's going on in the
African-American Community all over this
country so it's a matter of
communicating that perhaps the
Democratic core values are things like
diversity but not to the exclusion of
these Central questions of economics
it's not either or it is both and you
have to decide what does what is the
vision of the democratic party who's the
Democratic party taking on you tell me
Michael in this campaign Donald Trump
was taking on I mean every day there was
another enemy out there but by and large
the basic problem was millions of
illegal immigrants coming in who were
eating our cats and dogs and they were
the enemy going to solve that problem
everything would be great who was the
Democratic party taking on in that
campaign I mean what was their
explanation what were they going to do
to address the fact that so many people
in America are struggling that it have
anything to do with the greed of
corporate America the fact that you have
a billionaire class today that wants it
all they want to own the political
system does anyone really talk about the
degree to which the people on top own
this country and want more and more and
could give a damn about ordinary
Americans now that is what I believe
unlike Trump that's what I believe the
cause of our problems are I believe that
we can create a nation in which all
people have healthare all kids have good
quality child care we have a strong
public education system I believe we can
do that but we're not going to do it
unless we are able to take on the big
money interests who want to use this
economy to make themselves even richer
than they are right now that is the
defining issue to go back just a second
you seem very clear on the idea that the
Democratic party can be a party that
Embraces diversity a core value and even
elements of what you described as
identity politics but I just wonder if
you can grapple with the reality that
Donald Trump's message in opposition to
things like diversity equity and
inclusion holding it up as a boogeyman
and suggesting that it is unfair and
that Democrats want to bring that
unfairness and make it more and more
Central to the country's identity seem
to resonate in this election well it
resonates within the context of
Democrats not recognizing the pain that
Ordinary People are feeling and taking
on the people who caused that pain and
routing people around an agenda that
works for them you know you can't fight
something with nothing you got to have
an alternative Vision Trump had his
vision it was incorrect it was dishonest
it was in many cases racist and sexist
he had a vision he had an
explanation to my view Democrats really
did
[Music]
not we'll be right back
I want to press a little bit further
into this question of Democratic
Leadership being out of touch with the
working class and not meeting voters
where they are you've started to clearly
articulate this when you criticized the
Democrats for not appreciating and
communicating the pain of America's
working class but another element of
this emerging Democratic critique since
election day is that Democrats have
drawn what some are saying as
unnecessary lines in the sand about
where they go to have this conversation
in the first place when you were a
candidate for president you had no
problem going on shows like Joe Rogan's
he ended up backing you for president in
2016 and in this campaign Joe Rogan
invited all the candidates on his show
uh Donald Trump said yes JD Vance said
yes tens of millions of people saw vice
president Harris declined that
invitation to go on the show we suspect
in part because they worried about
blowback from Democrats who don't like
Rogan they think he's insensitive he's
not one of them and since then we found
out some voters viewed that Rogan
interview with Trump as kind of decisive
in their decision to vote for Trump are
Democrats writing off too many places
and too many mediums in this moment and
making a stake in their ability to reach
workingclass voters where they
are well funny you ask that Michael I am
thinking back to when I ran for
president in
2020 and I did an interview with the New
York Times you work for the New York
Times right I do and we did an interview
with the editorial board of the New York
Times of which I think they gave each
member 20 members or so I don't remember
two votes a piece right I was either
ahead or in second place in the polls at
that time and of the 40 votes that were
cast I got one of the votes that was
what the New York Times thought of my
campaign and yet here I am on your show
as employee of the New York Times am I
afraid of being on your show I am not am
I afraid of being on J Rogan show no
bottom line is what every communications
director knows is that there is a new
world of media out there and it's not
just NBC CBS or the New York Times it is
podcast it is Jo Rogan it is Fox News it
is young people who nobody in the
Democratic Leadership has ever heard of
who have YouTube programs that attract
millions of people that is the reality
can you ignore that that is insane
anyone who thinks you could ignore that
reality is crazy and my experience not
that I've been on millions of these
shows the people that I talk to treat me
with respect and I think you cannot be
you know oh Joe Rogan said this or he
says that yeah so what you know my wife
disagrees be on this or that issue so
what you can't run away from somebody
because they may have said something
stupid or something that you disagree
with that's life H but most importantly
when you go on the show what do you say
so Joe Rog ask you what do you think
about the fact that we have more income
and wealth inequality than ever before
oh well I can't answer that question
what do you think about the fact that
we're the only major country not to
guarantee Healthcare well she I'd like
to not talk about that what I don't want
to offend the insurance companies why
are we paying the highest prices in the
world for for scripture drugs I can't
talk about that cuz you know I get money
from the farmer that's the problem so
yeah you got to go on different Outlets
of course you do but most importantly
you got to know what you
believe and what you're prepared to
fight for and what your vision for the
future of this country is do you think
that the Democratic party is really
prepared to go where it needs to go in
taking the lessons that you're laying
out here and really moving ahead with
them I don't know if you know that uh
former speaker Nancy Pelosi came on a
podcast by our colleague Lulu Garcia
Naro and was presented with your
critique word for word of a Democratic
party and if I can put it politely she
dismissed it and said well I completely
disagree with what he's saying by the
way K Harris did better than you know
Senator Sanders in Vermont on Election
Day she pointed out you've lost your
races for president and Democratic
primaries well I tell you I got 63% of
the vote and I didn't spend one Niel on
advertising in Vermont how's that look I
I respect Nancy and we've known each
other for years and we've worked
together on some issues like the
American Rescue plan which I thought was
very consequential piece of legislation
but you know Nancy and I have different
Visions as to the future I think Nancy's
views May reverberate here inside the
Beltway I'm sure a lot of the pundits
and the consultants and politicians
agree with Nancy I suspect if you go out
into the hint lands you'll find that
most people agree with me Senator
looking forward to not just the idea
that the party will take what you're
saying and perhaps run with it but that
it needs to be embodied in a candidate
who can win when you close your eyes and
think of who can lead the party out of
this very decisive and for many
Democrats devastating
loss what do you see not necessarily who
do you see I maybe there is a who in
your mind but what is that future
candidate look it's a
candidate you know preferably but not
necessarily somebody from the working
class H who can speak to Working Class
People who will fight to end all forms
of bigotry in this country but is mostly
prepared to take on the big money
interests who today have an
unprecedented level of Economic and
political power with the Advent of all
the new technology is out there Michael
in terms of artificial intelligence in
terms of Robotics Etc we truthfully have
the capability now of creating a society
where all of our people have a decent
standard of living yeah we can actually
wipe out poverty we don't need to have
people sleeping out on the streets the
question is who will control the
utilization of that technology and who
will benefit from it so we need to have
somebody who primarily is prepared to
stand up to the ruling class of America
and say you know what we like your
entrepreneurial
capabilities but you got to control your
greed you can no longer have it all
you're going to be an important part of
the future but you're not going to own
and control the future we need somebody
like that do you think that if Democrats
do meet voters where they are and
connect with the pain and they pitch the
kind of progressive policies that you're
advoc for here especially on economics
that is the winning combination or has
trust in the Democratic party for a lot
of the reasons we've been talking about
here been strained if not broken in a
way that means that even getting it
right here is not really possible that's
a very good question because there's
been a huge loss of faith in government
yeah that's right that's that's right
you're right on that and I I will tell
you that even within the confines of the
democratic caucus and I don't you know
talk about things behind closed doors
but you'll have Democrats US senators
standing up and saying you know what
they hate us out there us the government
or the party well they hate the party
and they understand and you know you're
on to another issue which we don't have
time to get into right now even when
government does the right thing you got
a
bureaucracy which is so slow in
implementation of policy that people
don't see it when they should be sing
but that's a whole other issue it's
another issue and perhaps another
conversation but if people don't have
faith in government how do your
Solutions which do require a tremendous
role for our government how do you sell
them well that's that's it that's again
a good question and I think here's where
we're at the Elon musks of the world
will say look government can't do
anything it's going to be the private
sector cut it cut it cut it is his
message right right and and you know
look Elon Musk is a very very aggressive
and capable business person very
impressive of what he's accomplished and
he says I can do more in a week than the
government can do in you know five years
and some ways he is right the problem is
at the end of his efforts he ends up
making zillions of dollars and
workingclass people are not any better
off all right the alternative is to say
oh let the government do it right now
but you got a government that is
inefficient and bureaucratic right so
people are looking and say all right we
got the greed of the ruling class they
do things pretty well but they end up
with all the money and the working class
ends up with the lowest standard of
living than they used to have or you got
a government which is very slow in doing
anything so that that is it seems to me
where we are as a nation we got to do
better than that what's the answer the
answer is to bring young people into
government who believe in a mission to
improve the lives of people whether you
work in the post office whether you work
in the Veterans Administration whether
you work in Social Security pay these
people well give them good management
let them be proud of the important work
that they are do no more important work
in in this country than being a public
school teacher all right yet we underpay
those teachers we put them under
terrible working conditions Choice has
got to be to modernize government make
government work for Ordinary People
health care for all is a human right if
other countries around the world can
have National Healthcare programs so can
the United States of America we're not
DB with under the people I have a final
question for you yeah when Trump won
last time many Democrats organized
themselves into what was Loosely
described sometimes by them as the
resistance that resistance many
Democrats now think ended up pushing the
party further and further to the left
leading to things like a primary in 2020
in which people like KLA Harris made
commitments to leftwing causes that came
back to Haunter and made it possible
well now you're on to another Michael no
I'm just dead this is my final question
do you worry that the party could be
heading down that path again of you
haven't heard a word that I've
said and that's impressive you know
it's the things that kamla was talking
about the things that what I was talk
every one of those issues is enormously
popular is that what you're talking
about no no no I mean on social issues
oh I don't know you know social issues
you know she I don't know yes set
setting comma aside I think what you're
about to tell me is Michael many of the
economic issues on the left are very
popular with many Americans as economic
policy yeah we oppold them all in
Missouri you may have followed in this
election Missouri a conservative State
58% of the people voted to raise the
minimum wage oh by the way we haven't
been able to do that here in a
democratically control when those
policies were in isolation on the ballot
separate from a Democratic party and
candidate carrying all the baggage that
we're talking about here well the point
is if Democrats were focusing on those
issues and saying gee how come that one
Republican wants to raise the minimum
wage to at least 15 bucks an hour how
come one Republican doesn't believe that
Healthcare is a human right how come one
Republican doesn't want to expand Social
Security so that the elderly people can
live their lives with dignity you put
them on the defensive but when you don't
offer anything you are on the defensive
right I mean it's worth saying that many
of those Missouri voters voted for those
Progressive economic policies as ballot
measures and then turned around and
voted for Trump which means it's deeper
than
policy well maybe next time we'll go
into that no it's not deeper than policy
Senator I know you have to go I don't
know if you've been thinking about this
but um you're
83 and thanks Michael I I did know that
see this is a percep of New York Times
investigative reporter I here we go but
running for president depending on the
moment in the candidate can be a very
age defiant question and you still sound
like a candidate for president to me I
mean is it totally out of the question
yeah yes I don't think the American
people want a president who's 104 years
of age so you know um you'd be 87 all
right well now the answer is I would say
it's you know I'm very proud that the
people of Vermont in very large numbers
uh reelected me for a fourth term I'm
very proud of that and uh that's where
we are all right Senator thank you for
your time thank you bye-bye
[Music]
we'll be right
back here's what else you need to know
today president-elect Trump said he
would nominate Robert F Kennedy Jor to
lead the health and human services
department giving a vocal skeptic of
vacc sces responsibility for the
nation's vast system of public health if
Kennedy is confirmed his resistance to
Public Health measures and his Embrace
of alternative medicine could lead to
Fierce clashes with the agencies that he
would
oversee and on Thursday the governor of
New York dramatically revived a first in
the nation plan to fund mass transit by
tolling cars in Manhattan's busiest
neighborhoods and I'm proud to announce
we have found a path to fund the
MTA reduce
congestion and keep millions of dollars
in the pockets of our
commuters Governor Kathy hokel said that
the program known as congestion pricing
would begin in January with a total of
$9 per car down from the original price
tag of $15 per car hok had cancelled the
plan over the summer because she argued
that original toll was too
high remember you can catch a new
episode of the interview right here
tomorrow this week David maresi talks
with Dr Ellen Weed a longtime advocate
for and practitioner of medical
assistance in dying sometimes I
struggle when I see a young beautiful
person choosing to leave earlier than
they needed to but I believe so strongly
in basic human rights if that person
says that they can't live in with this
condition I will honor their
wishes today's episode was produced by
Jessica Chong Michael Simon Johnson and
Nina Feldman it was edited by paig cowt
Lisa chow and Patricia willins with help
from Michael benoa contains original
music by Maran Lozano and Pat mccusker
and was engineered by Chris Wood our
theme music is by Jim runberg and Ben
lansberg of wonderl special thanks to
Lexi di Lisa Lair Reed Epstein and Shane
goldm
[Music]
that's it for the daily I'm Michael Boro
see you on Monday
[Music]